# Delivery Technologies for Genome Editing

## Introduction
	adeno-associated virus (AAV)-mediated delivery 
		First viral gene-transfer technology to receive marketing approval in Europe
		Limitations
			size of encapsulated transgenes
			pre-existing immunity against AAV vectors
			CD8+ T cell-mediated adaptive response against the AAV capsid
			turnover of the infected cells
			Low Percision Control
	RNA modification therapies
		RNA interference (RNAi)
		antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs),
	programmable DNA nucleases
		meganucleases
		zinc-finger nucleases (ZFNs)
		transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs)
		CRISPR–Cas system

## Genome-editing platforms
	Double-strand breaks (DSBs) repaire
		non-homologous end joining (NHEJ)
			effecient, but error prone
			Good for deleteing bad genes
			tends to lead to insertions or deletions (indels)
		homology-directed repair (HDR)
			requires template
			Optimization of the conditions of delivery
				the timing of providing the donor template78,
				the format and dose of the donor template93,131
				synchronization of the cell cycle40,63)
	meganucleases
		Protein-DNA Specificity
			Can target multiple, but requires substancial engineering.
		Lower Mutation Rate
		~1 kb
	zinc-finger nucleases (ZFNs)
		Protein-DNA Specificity
		chimeric protein =  zinc-finger domain for DNA binding + cleavage domain of the FokI nuclease
		require complicated engineering of zinc-finger domain to pick new target
		One targeting site every 4-30 base pairs?
		Lower Mutation Rate
		Can't easily target multiple sites
		~2 kb
	transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs)
		Protein-DNA Specificity
		transcription activator-like effector (TALE) for DNA binding and a FokI nuclease
		Pretty fast engineering
		80-90% sucess in mammillian cells, including >1% mutation frequency
		Higher Mutation Rate
		Can't easily target multiple sites
		~3 kb
	CRISPR–Cas system
		RNA-DNA Specificity
		80-90% sucess in mammillian cells, including >1% mutation frequency
		Higher Mutation Rate
		Can target multiple sites easily.
		~3.5–4.5 kb
	"new methods to evaluate off-target effects42–47 and to improve the specificity of the CRISPR system48–55 have been developed"
	
	All these require also delivering the template (be it RNA or DNA)

## Delivery of biomacromolecules
	**Viral delivery of genome-editing systems**
		viral systems can induce long-term transgene expression (i.e. might keep expressing the proteins to change DNA over and over)
		"Refined vector systems, improved production methods, enhanced transduction efficiency and better safety profiles have been achieved during the past decade 11."
		Well studied: Retroviral vectors, adenoviral vectors and AAV vectors 
		Basically always serious safety concerns. 
			Any immune responce might be enough to kill folks
		bare nucleic acid 
			subject to degradation by endogenous nucleases in the blood
			could potentially activate the immune system as a foreign nucleic acid
			should preferably only transfect the targeted cell type.
		
		**In vitro and ex vivo approaches**
			Integrase-defective lentiviral vectors (IDLVs)
				ZFNs + Donor Template, in vivo
				diminishes by dilution in dividing cells
				reduce the risk of introducing insertional mutagenesis by abolishing its insertion mechanisms.
				free-ended, double-stranded and can result in insertion at off-target sites or spontaneous DSBs
			adenoviral
				Protein-capped adenoviral vectors seem to exhibit greater specificity and accuracy than free-ended
				Has been tested with CAS-9
					>50% indel
			AAV vectors 
				Has been tested with CAS-9 using dual vecotors? Literally a problem in fitting it in the cell.
					>40% indel 
					Single vecotor raised control concerns?
			Ex vivo
				knocking endogenous T cell receptor, which otherwise can dimerize with exogenous antitumour T cell receptors to decrease the specificity
			In vivo
				The potential of viral vectors to facilitate in vivo genome editing has been examined in several different model systems26,29,32,61,75,90,91.
				
	Despite these challenges, there is growing evidence to indicate that functional levels of genome editing can be obtained in a range of tissues using different approaches26,28–30,32,73,78,110,126.

	Suppressing NHEJ moderately increases HDR in cells, although the safety of such strategies is currently unknown132,133.
	If a target gene has not been properly expressed in tissues due to gene deficiency, it is possible that the proteins produced by the correct copy could induce an adaptive immune response
## Questions
	What are:
		CRISPR 
		transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs)
		zinc-finger nucleases (ZFNs)
		safe harbour locus (84)
		immune-checkpoint blockade
	VEGFA-specific antibody is used to treat age-related macular degeneration
	
## Other Reviews
	Yin, H. et al. Non-viral vectors for gene-based therapy. Nat. Rev. Genet. 15, 541–555 (2014).
	Kay, M. A. State-of-the-art gene-based therapies: the road ahead. Nat. Rev. Genet. 12, 316–328 (2011).